QUESTION TYPE: PRIMARY CARE AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
CLINICAL CASE: 
Juan, a second year resident, attends Sofia, a 15 year old girl in the emergency room, who apparently fainted at school without losing consciousness. The patient says that she was due to take an exam, which caused her a lot of anxiety. From the interrogation, it appears that she was being bullied by her classmates and that she may have an eating disorder. Vital signs and neurological examination are normal. Juan keeps Soﬁa under observation while waiting for her parents to come to the service, periodically taking a look at how the patient is doing. After the initial scare, the patient seems to be increasingly animated and is very friendly. On one occasion, Juan finds her actively chatting on her cell phone. Juan tells her that it would be better for her to put the cell phone down and rest and to reassure her, he tells her that he also uses social networks a lot since college. Soﬁa apologizes for not knowing that she should have her cell phone turned off, and after turning it off, asks if she can make a friend request on Facebook. What do you think is Juan's best response?
1- Tell him to make the friend request and that he will accept it, as he is sure that there are no inappropriate items on his page for a girl of Soﬁa's age.
2- Because you consider Soﬁa a vulnerable patient and are concerned that she may misinterpret a rejection, agree to let her make the request but only allow her access to certain content on your page.
3- Answer that it is important to maintain certain professional boundaries between patients and physicians and that, unfortunately, if you make the request you will not be able to accept it, so it is better not to do so.
4- Tell him to make the request but without any intention of accepting it.
5- nan
CORRECT ANSWER: 3
There is no doubt that the doctor-patient relationship today transcends the physical environment of the consultation room. But we must not forget that we must maintain the same ethical and professional codes as in the real environment. The code of ethics Article 26-3. The clinical practice of medicine by means of consultations exclusively by letter, telephone, radio, press or internet, is contrary to the deontological norms. The correct action implies inescapably the personal and direct contact between the doctor and the patient.