QUESTION TYPE: CRITICAL AND EMERGENCY CARE
CLINICAL CASE: 
15-year-old male, admitted after being run over on the public road, resulting in being ejected. He was admitted conscious and oriented, with intense pain in the left hemithorax and dyspnea. Physical examination showed blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, heart rate 130 bpm, basal oxygen saturation 90%, respiratory rate 35 rpm. There is complete hypophonesis in the left hemithorax and dullness to percussion. Chest X-ray shows multiple left costal fractures and massive ipsilateral pleural effusion. Placement of a pleural drain is indicated, with 1700 cc of hematic fluid coming out. What is the decision to be made:
1- Institute noninvasive mechanical ventilation and request blood transfusion.
2- Analgesia, oxygen therapy, request blood transfusion and indicate urgent surgery.
3- Orotracheal intubation, request blood transfusion and observation for, in case of worsening, indicate surgical intervention.
4- Orotracheal intubation and urgent CT scan for accurate assessment of lesions.
5- nan
CORRECT ANSWER: 2
There are two answers that we can immediately rule out if we stick to the initial management of severe chest trauma: 1 (noninvasive ventilation is not indicated because it does not secure the airway) and 3 (observation in these cases, waiting for worsening, only leads to increased morbidity and mortality). Between options 2 and 4 there could be controversy between the literature and the usual clinical practice, in which we usually have to face in a delicate balance the clinical stability of the patient (and what we can "make up" this stability with our life support therapies) and the actions that result in better patient care for the definitive treatment of the lesions. We are dealing with a severe polytraumatized patient. With the data provided by the question, a patient who seems to be in shock (tachycardia, hypoxemia, tachypnea... although we do not receive data, for example, on lactacidemia), and in whom we have to our knowledge a left thoracic trauma, which not only implies bone injury, but may mask other injuries of high severity and which are not diagnosed with a chest X-ray: myocardial contusion, pericardial effusion, splenic injury, diaphragmatic injury... We place a left pleural drain on the patient and obtain a debit of 1700cc of hematic fluid. If we follow the ATLS (ATLS-Advanced Trauma Life Support 10th edition) guidelines for the care of severely polytraumatized patients, they tell us that an immediate bleeding of more than 1500cc of blood is an indication for urgent thoracotomy, and that even in patients with a bleeding of less than 1500cc, if the debit persists at a rate of 200mL/h for 2 to 4h, this indication would also exist. Therefore, the person who asked the MIR question wants us to answer option 2. However, in real life, the course of action will depend on the stability of the patient when we have applied the treatments indicated in option 2: adequate analgesia, oxygen therapy and initiation of blood transfusion. If by optimizing the patient we manage to stabilize him and assess that it is safe to transfer him, the performance of a body CT scan will define in much greater detail the lesions he has, and will help to ensure that the surgery he will probably end up undergoing will be a definitive surgery and not just damage control surgery. In this case, the doubt would arise with option 4, although, as I say, everything will depend on the clinical stability of the patient and the time we have before achieving definitive control of the hemorrhagic focus (which is, after all, what we are after in this situation).