QUESTION TYPE: PSYCHIATRY
CLINICAL CASE: 
A 23-year-old woman comes to the emergency department because she is very nervous after an argument with her partner. Her medical history shows several similar complaints in the previous year, two of them after a self-injurious gesture. Frequent conflicts in the couple's relationship, job changes and family arguments are also noted. She says she feels misunderstood by everyone, including the psychiatrists attending her. The diagnosis is:
1- Borderline personality disorder.
2- Histrionic personality disorder.
3- Dysthymia.
4- Dissociative disorder.
5- Depersonalization disorder.
CORRECT ANSWER: 1
The woman is 23 years old and is pissed off. She needs support and a lot of emotional education to curb her impulsivity... she feels misunderstood... maybe she is right... The issue is that she cannot stand rejection and has self-injurious gestures. The diagnosis is 1. 3, 4 and 5 are not even close, there is no clinical picture described in the question. Then in real life exploring well almost certainly there would be dissociative and depersonalization symptoms, as well as depressive symptoms... but symptom is not disorder. Why not 2? It could also be very punctilious and spinning very fine... here the discussion is served. I put the criteria of each one and we talk about it,... but the intention of the examiner was the 1 and I see it well defended. It cannot be challenged. - The limit: A general pattern of instability in interpersonal relationships, self-image and self-efficacy, and notable impulsivity, beginning in early adulthood and occurring in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following items: 1. Frantic efforts to avoid real or imagined abandonment. Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behaviors covered in Criterion 5. 2. A pattern of unstable and intense interpersonal relationships characterized by alternating between extremes of idealization and devaluation. 3. Identity disturbance: marked and persistently unstable self-image or sense of self. Impulsivity in at least two areas, which is potentially self-harming (e.g., spending, sex, substance abuse, reckless driving, binge eating). Note: Do not include suicidal or self-mutilating behaviors listed in Criterion 5. 5. Recurrent suicidal behaviors, attempts or threats, or self-mutilating behavior. Affective instability due to marked mood reactivity (e.g., episodes of intense dysphoria, irritability, or anxiety, usually lasting a few hours and rarely a few days). 7. Chronic feelings of emptiness. 8. Inappropriate and intense anger or difficulties in controlling anger (e.g., frequent displays of temper, constant anger, recurrent physical fights). 9. Transient stress-related paranoid ideation or severe dissociative symptoms. - The histrionic: A general pattern of excessive emotionality and attention-seeking, beginning in early adulthood and occurring in a variety of contexts, as indicated by five (or more) of the following items: 1. Not comfortable in situations where he/she is not the center of attention. Interaction with others is often characterized by sexually seductive or provocative behavior. 3. 3. Displays a superficial and rapidly changing emotional expression. 4. Constantly uses physical appearance to draw attention to him/herself. 5. Has a way of speaking that is excessively subjective and lacking in nuance. 6. Shows self-dramatization, theatricality and exaggerated emotional expression. 7. Is suggestible, e.g., easily influenced by others or by circumstances. 8. considers his relationships more intimate than they really are.