QUESTION TYPE: DIGESTIVE
CLINICAL CASE: 
A 43-year-old man with no diseases of interest comes to the emergency department for 4 melaenic stools in the last 12 hours. He refers taking NSAIDs in previous days. Physical examination revealed pale skin and mucous membranes. BP 95/65 and HR 110 bpm. The abdomen is not painful and rectal examination shows melenic stools. The CBC shows a Hb of 8.1 gr/dl. After infusion of saline and the start of red blood cell concentrate transfusion, the BP was 120/85 and HR 90 bpm. An endoscopy was performed in which clots were found in the stomach and a 2 cm ulcer in the gastric antrum with fibrin background and a small grayish-white protrusion of 3 mm in the center of the ulcer (visible platelet thrombus vessel). What do you think is the most correct approach?
1- Since the patient is young, with no associated diseases and the ulcer has stopped bleeding, he can be discharged early with treatment with a PPI and H. Pylori eradication.
2- Remove the endoscope, place nasogastric tube for continuous aspiration and initiate treatment with a PPI and somatostatin.
3- Take biopsy for H. Pylori, remove the endoscope taking care not to dislodge the platelet thrombus and continue pharmacological treatment with i.v. PPI.
4- Consultation to the surgical service to consider urgent surgical treatment.
5- Endoscopic treatment by injection of adrenaline into the ulcer and placement of clips (metal staples) followed by i.v. administration of PPI.
CORRECT ANSWER: 5
Question about non-varicose ADH. Young patient, with no previous history, who after taking NSAIDs presents bleeding with hemodynamic instability requiring transfusion.  Answer 1 is not in accordance with what has been said, this is an unstable patient who has bled a lot, who has a Forrest IIa ulcer with a high risk of rebleeding. Answer 2 speaks of somatostatin, which is used for bleeding due to portal hypertension. 4 will only be considered if bleeding is not controlled endoscopically. Between 3 and 5, since there is a high risk of bleeding, endoscopic therapy is recommended, preferably with 2 techniques, so the correct one would be 5.