QUESTION TYPE: ALLERGOLOGY
CLINICAL CASE: 
A 25-year-old woman with a history of allergic bronchial asthma due to sensitization to grass pollens and atopic dermatitis. She suddenly presents hypotension, tachycardia, urticaria and bronchospasm after ingesting peanuts and is transferred to the emergency department. What would be the order of drugs to be administered and what laboratory test could be requested for further evaluation?
1- Intramuscular adrenaline, followed by an inhaled bronchodilator of the SABA type and intramuscular dexchlorpheniramine. Then request serum tryptase.
2- An inhaled SABA-type bronchodilator, followed by intramuscular dexchlorpheniramine and intramuscular adrenaline. Then order serum tryptase.
3- Intramuscular dexchlorpheniramine, followed by an inhaled bronchodilator of the SABA type and intramuscular adrenaline. Then request eosinophil cationic protein.
4- Intramuscular adrenaline, followed by an inhaled bronchodilator of the SABA type and intramuscular dexchlorpheniramine. Then request eosinophil cationic protein.
5- nan
CORRECT ANSWER: 1
The patient is suffering from anaphylactic shock secondary to peanut ingestion. The treatment of anaphylaxis and anaphylactic shock of first choice is intramuscular adrenaline 1mg/ml (dose 0.01 mg/kg, in adults 0.5 mg maximum). Followed by symptomatic treatment to stabilize the airway with 100% high flow O2, ensure large caliber venous access, fluid replacement and continuous monitoring (HR, BP, SatO2 , diuresis). As adjuvant treatment, an inhaled bronchodilator such as SABA, intramuscular dexchlorpheniramine or corticosteroids such as hydrocortisone IV or methylprednisolone IV can be administered. Adrenaline can be repeated at the same doses every 5 minutes a maximum of 3 times and if after 15 minutes there is no response, IV adrenaline infusion should be started, Glucagon (if treatment with beta-blockers), Atropine (if prolonged bradycardia) or Vasopressors (if refractory hypotension). The laboratory marker that should be requested if anaphylaxis is suspected is serum tryptase in the first hour for a basal determination and another at 4-6 hours to observe its elevation curve. It is not an emergency marker but it is very useful for future allergological study.